# MAPISCo
Data and code from the MAPISCo project. Currently this code and the data are the oldest versions and are in the process of being updated. Some of the code will not work. Please proceed with caution!

##Executive summary

Context. Biodiversity is declining at unprecedented levels globally, and meeting international targets aimed at halting these declines requires conservation efforts targeted not only at species but also at other aspects of biodiversity such as habitats, cultural values and ecosystem services. In spite of this wide range of targets requiring investment, resources available are declining. Against this backdrop, the UK Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) sought, via this project, to develop a methodology for identifying species for which targeted conservation action would have the broadest consequential benefits (hereafter co-benefits) on other species, habitats, wider ecosystems, and ecosystem services.

Agreed scope and aims. The objectives of the MAPISCo project were - 1) To develop a scoring method which enables species to be ranked based on their combined contribution to a selection of co-benefits linked to conservation targets (Aichi targets). Concentration of conservation on these high-ranking species would, in theory, result in the largest associated biodiversity benefit. This methodology would be Expandable, able to include further datasets should they become available, Adaptable, with the weighting of co-benefits able to be altered in line with varying policy aspirations, and Usable, ultimately able to be used by non-expert practitioners.

Selection of co-benefits. Five co-benefits were selected for inclusion in the methodology- (1) Habitat and area conservation (Aichi targets 5 and 7), (2) Sustainable harvesting of fish, invertebrates and aquatic plants (Aichi target 6), (3) Conservation of genetic diversity of wild relatives of cultivated plants and domesticated animals (Aichi target 13), (4) Protection of the provisioning of ecosystem services (Target 14) and (5) the prevention of species extinctions (Aichi target 12). The selection of these co-benefits was based on the Aichi targets of policy interest to Defra. They could also be linked in a scientifically defensible way with conservation effort on a species level AND have adequate data associated with them (from preliminary searches) to be related to species conservation lists, incurring as few taxonomic and geographic biases as possible. However, it should be stressed that this methodological framework can be extended to include more co-benefits in the future, given, for example, specific policy needs (Expandable).

Scoring. The methodology proposed here produces species lists ranked by their expected value in contributing to each of the five focal co-benefits under consideration. First, reliable data sources were identified that could be used to quantify the value of a given species to each of the five co-benefits. Species from these data sources were then added to a database and given a score for each of the five co-benefits. Details of how this was done are explained briefly in Table S1. The scores from each database were then combined to obtain an overall value that corresponds to species rank (see Box S1). Twelve data sources were found to be suitable for inclusion in the database at this stage. Many more were identified but later disregarded because of issues with data coverage and compatibility. The weighting, or importance, of each co-benefit can be adjusted in response to policy aspirations – this makes the methodology highly Adaptable

Results – example priority lists. The results generated by the database in its current format are constrained by data availability (e.g. only around 3% of all plant species have been categorised on the IUCN Red List while almost all bird species are included). For this reason in this section we present three different sets of results 1. All species, 2.Birds only (taxonomic case study) and 3. SE Asia only (geographic case study). The use of case studies allows us to focus on discrete sets of data, which, while not eliminating the constraints completely, allows a more meaningful demonstration of how the database can be used. For each set of lists we have outlined the main findings from the method followed by a discussion of how some of the key findings could be related to policy actions.
Generally, the results indicate that “politically interesting” or flagship species often championed by interest groups do not generally rank highly (e.g. Polar Bear Ursus maritimus 45625th and White Rhinoceros Ceratotherium simum 51510th), because they are associated with only a small number of the co-benefits considered here. There are 1064 species which occur in the top 500 regardless of changes in the co-benefit weightings, these include 502 birds, 161 mammals, 158 amphibians, 151 fish, 54 plants, 20 reptiles and 18 “other” species. This reflects the need for more data on plants, reptiles and invertebrates. Both the Habitat and Ecosystem Services co-benefits are significantly negatively correlated to Threat Status, meaning that more traditional approaches to conservation (based on extinction risk- the IUCN Red List) do not capture more recent concerns about protecting a range of co-benefits from each species. The MAPISCo methodology successfully prioritises both extinction risk and contribution to co-benefits.
Using the method. Expandable - we demonstrate how additional species or co-benefit data can be added to the database, and outline how such changes impact on the ranking of priority lists. Adaptable. We examine the effect changing individual co-benefit weightings (i.e. making certain co-benefits “more important” in the calculation of priority lists than others) has on priority list ranking. Usable. Here we outline the development of a web-based interface, which, using a variety of tabs and graphics, allows users to fully explore the priority lists created by the methodology under a number of different scenarios. Importantly, it also enables user to investigate how varying individual co-benefit weightings impact upon rankings. We view this as a critical feature of the GUI, as it makes it extremely adaptable to policy aspirations. Further investment in this project could see this tool becoming available open source to interested parties

Discussion and project legacy. We conclude that we have delivered a methodology that can prioritise species for conservation based on their expected contributions to a selection of co-benefits. Thus, higher-ranking species should make greater contributions to meeting relevant Aichi targets (5-8 and 12-14). This methodology is expandable – additional datasets can be added to it should they become available, adaptable – co-benefit weightings can be altered to fit with individual policy aims and usable – the development of a graphic user interface will allow non-technical users to use the method.

The original ambitious conceptual development of MAPISCo was rooted in the desire to embed science firmly in international species policy. The core issue was that biodiversity spending can tend towards projects focussed on charismatic animals with little evidence scientific justification for such action. The method we present here yields priority lists based on available scientific evidence but there are major caveats. The most important is the paucity of data available for some taxa (especially plants). Whilst our analysis based on a well-known taxon (birds) for which all species are assessed on the Red List does yield potentially usable results other prioritisation results based on combining taxa are inevitably strongly biased by data availability.

As a consequence of this we therefore outline a road-map to overcoming the challenges of linking science and policy effectively in biodiversity governance in a way that will help ensure that MAPISCo strengthens the UK’s ability to maximise the wider value to biodiversity of its spend on international species conservation.

Conclusion. We have developed a methodology which provides a broad-brush mechanism for identifying species priorities based on a selection of co-benefits using currently available and accessible data. In doing this, it has become clear that explicit policy decisions are required during the prioritisation process. Bringing this into sharp focus in a specific case is a significant contribution to increasing engagement at the science-policy interface because it shows how intertwined the biodiversity decision-making process is. We feel, therefore, that MAPSICo is poised to be more policy relevant in the near-future than other prioritisation processes which are less sensitive to the practicalities of policy-making. Implied in the original project brief is an assumption of a relatively straightforward and linear science-policy interface, where policy asks a question, science answers it and then policy decides. In practice, there has to be meaningful dialogue between policy-makers and scientists to that the best information available is used to inform policy as soundly as possible. We have reached a stage where there is a sound basis and significant progress can be made once policy and practical issues are clearer. Overall, there is significant potential for the methodology described here to become part of an iterative process where conservation science and policy continually inform each other to produce more societally relevant science policy that is more evidence-based.